1. Wodjanoj

  Green, 50 hit points. Awards 5000 points. Appearance is anglerfish-like.
  Ordinarily is nearly invisible. When an enemy approaches, it becomes highly
  visible and begins charging its Laser Bógów. It realeases the burst after 7
  seconds or when the enemy is to far away from the direction of the beam, then
  returns to invisibility. If an enemy comes near with less than 10% health, it
  becomes visible and charges them. Contact deals 10 damage at 0.1-second
  intervals.

  Mature Wodjanoj drop a single Laser Bógów on death.

  Wodjanoj have no immature form.

2. Simargł

  Cyan, 20 hit points per segment; head segments have an additional 20 hit
  points. Awarys 1000 points per segment, 1500 for the head. Appearance is a
  chain of rounded squarish segments somewhat reminiscent of an eastern
  dragon. Simargły continuously roam the map around their home area looking for
  prey, and will relentlessly attack any enemy until the enemy or the Simargł
  is destroyed. When attacking, fires Beryli na Barierkarmatach at the target
  from the Simargł's head. Whenever a segment is destroyed (head or otherwise),
  the segment behind it becomes a head of a new Simargł as long as there are at
  least two further segments behind it. (Ie, Simargły can be split in two.)
  Contact does not damage the player. Simargły are generally solitary, but do
  not actively avoid each other, and will cooperate in killing a common foe.

  Destroying a Simargł head will drop 2 Beryli na Barierkarmatach; destroying a
  segment drops 1.

  Simargły do not have a true immature form. They begin at three segments long
  and gradually grow longer, up to 10 segments. Split Simargły will gradually
  grow to full size as well.

3. Rusałka

  Magenta, 25 hit points. Awards 2000 points. Appearance is
  jellyfish-like. Ordinarily, it floats / swims around in a manner similar to a
  real jellyfish. When an enemy is nearby, it fires Bomby Szalone in the
  general direction. If reduced to 10 hit points, falls to the ground and
  charges enemies. Contact deals 4 damage at 0.1-second intervals. Mature
  Rusałki are solitary.

  Immature form: 5 hit points, awards 100 points. Does not attack, and never
  becomes grounded. Immature Rusałki are social, occurring in clusters of five
  to twenty. Contact deals 2 damage at 0.1-second intervals.

  Destroying a mature Rusałkę drops one or two Bombe Szalone.

4. Psogław

  Primary yellow, 40 hit points. Awarys 4000 points. Appearance is
  nudibranch-like. Psogławy slowly wander the map aimlessly, indifferent to
  their home area. When a threat is nearby, they attack with Gołąby
  Jeżone. Contact with an adult Psogław is instant death.

  Immature form: 10 hit points, awards 250 points. Does not attack, and stays
  near the home area. Contact deals 5 damage per 0.1-second interval.

  Destroying a mature Psogława drops 3 Gołąby Jeżone.

5. Skrzak

  Blue, 3 hit points. Awards 250 points. Ordinary appearance is invisible
  except for intermittent sparkles at the edges of an oval. Skrzaki gather in
  random locations somewhat removed from their home. Once 10 to 30 have
  accumulated, they travel en masse to the nearest enemy within a certain range
  of the home location. When within range of an enemy, they manifest and
  bombard them with Złe Tryki. When the enemy is destroyed, the group moves
  onto the next enemy within range. If there is no enemy, the group remains
  gathered at the gathering point. If an attacking group is reduced to fewer
  than 10 Skrzaki, they retreat to a new gathering point and remain until a new
  group is built. However, in any case, they will attach any enemy that gets
  too close to the home point. Manifested Skrzaki have stronger outlines and
  emit sparks. Contact with a Skrzaki deals no damage.

  Destroying a Skrzaka drops 2 Złe Tryki.

6. Bauk

  Red, 200 hit points. Awards 7500 points. Appearance is of a nautilus. Bauki
  always drift very near their home area, completely unaffected by
  gravity. They fire Sprężysty Mrówki at enemies, in the reverse their
  direction of travel. Contact with the tentacles of a Bauk deals 20 damage at
  0.1-second intervals, but other contact with a Bauk is harmless.

  Immature form: 20 hit points, awards 200 points. They are completely
  passive. Contact deals 2 damage per 0.1-second interval.

  Destroying a Bauk drops 10 Sprężysty Mrówki.
